The US defence secretary warned North Korea that any threat to the US or its allies would be met with a “massive military response” on Sunday, as the Trump administration scrambled to respond to Pyongyang’s claim it has tested a powerful hydrogen bomb that can be loaded on to an intercontinental ballistic missile.

“We are not looking to the total annihilation of a country, namely North Korea,” said James Mattis, speaking outside the White House, but “we have many options to do so”.

He added: “We made clear that we have the ability to defend ourselves and our allies, South Korea and Japan, from any attack. And our commitment among the allies is ironclad: any threat to the United States or its territories, including Guam, or our allies will be met with a massive military response, a response both effective and overwhelming.”

And he told Kim Jong-un to “take heed of the United Nations security council’s unified voice” and de-nuclearise the Korean peninsula. The United Nations security council called a meeting for Monday.

Amid alarm from world leaders over North Korea’s claim that it can now, for the first time, put a nuclear warhead on an ICBM, Trump had earlier upped the ante with a series of provocative statements.

Asked outside church in Washington whether he planned to attack the isolated, hostile dictatorship, the US president replied: “We’ll see.”

He and the first lady were whisked back to the White House from St John’s Episcopal church in an SUV. Shortly afterwards, Trump tweeted: “I will be meeting General Kelly [John Kelly, chief of staff], General Mattis and other military leaders at the White House to discuss North Korea. Thank you.”

Earlier in the day, after news emerged overnight that North Korea was believed to have detonated a large hydrogen bomb in a test in the north of the country, deepening the biggest foreign policy challenge faced by his administration, Trump posted a series of tweets.

“North Korea has conducted a major nuclear test,” the president wrote. “Their words and actions continue to be very hostile and dangerous to the United States.”

He added: “North Korea is a rogue nation which has become a great threat and embarrassment to China, which is trying to help but with little success.”

And he also accused South Korea of favouring a policy of “appeasement”, telling Seoul that “will not work” because the North Koreans “only understand one thing!”

Early on Monday, South Korea’s military said its air forces and the army carried out a missile drill in response to North Korea’s nuclear test, adding the drills targeted the area where the test had been carried out.

The military training involved long-range air-to-surface missiles and ballistic missiles, South Korea’s joint chiefs of staff said in a statement. The drill was carried out by only the South Korean military but more are being prepared with the US forces in South Korea, the statement said. 

Pyongyang said the test, its sixth since 2006, had been a “complete success” and involved a two-stage thermonuclear weapon of unprecedented strength.

There has been no independent verification of North Korea’s claims that it has achieved a key goal in its nuclear programme – the ability to miniaturise a warhead so that it can fit on a long-distance missile.

The regime has earlier released footage of what it said was a hydrogen bomb that would be loaded on to a new ICBM.

Pyongyang’s TV announcement, which was accompanied by patriotic music and images of North Korean landscape and military hardware, said the test had been ordered by the country’s leader, Kim Jong-un.

The explosion caused by a 6.3-magnitude earthquake felt in Yanji, China, about six miles (10km) from North Korea’s Punggye-ri nuclear test site in the north-east of the country.

South Korea’s meteorological administration estimated the blast yield at between 50 to 60 kilotons, or five to six times more powerful than North Korea’s fifth test in September last year.

Kim Young-woo, the head of South Korea’s parliamentary defence committee said later that the yield was as high as 100 kilotons. One kiloton is equivalent to 1,000 tons of TNT.

The previous nuclear blast in North Korea is estimated by experts to have been about 10 kilotons.

Sunday’s test, the first since Trump took office in January, offers further evidence that North Korea is moving perilously close to developing a nuclear warhead capable of being fitted on to an ICBM that can strike the US mainland.

Since it conducted its first nuclear test just over a decade ago, the regime has strived to refine the design and reliability of its weapons, as well as increasing their yield.

Hydrogen bombs are far more powerful than the atomic weapons Pyongyang is believed to have tested so far.

Trump also tweeted again shortly after noon, in apparent support of a new policy initiative announced by his treasury secretary, Steven Mnuchin, earlier in the day, where he called for any countries that trade with North Korea to be barred from trading with the US.

from "The Gaurdian"
